# About
This method estimates the structural susceptibility of protein regions to proteolysis based on the known (from PDB database) or model (from AlphaFoldDB database) three-dimensional structure of a protein. The method calculates a numerical score, ranging from 0 to 1, for each peptide bond, representing its structural susceptibility to proteolysis. A score of 1 indicates a high structural susceptibility to proteolysis, while a score of 0 indicates a low structural susceptibility to proteolysis.

# Dependencies
For the correct work of the method, you need to install the following software:
* [Clustal Omega](http://www.clustal.org/omega/)
* [UCSF Chimera](https://github.com/insilichem/pychimera/blob/master/docs/install.rst)
* [DSSP](https://github.com/PDB-REDO/dssp) (optional, but strongly recommended)

and the following python libraries:

* Biopython
* pandas
* numpy
* requests

# Quick start

To calculate scores for a specific chain of the known experimental 3D structure (e.g. the A chain of 4GAW), execute the following command, which includes automatic downloading of the 3D structure from the PDB server (`-i`), selecting the chain (`-c`), running the locally installed DSSP (`-l`), and visualizing the results (`-v`):

```python run.py -i 4GAW -c A -l -v```

To calculate scores for a model 3D structure from AlphaFoldDB (e.g. AF-P00257-F1), execute the following command, which includes automatic downloading of the 3D structure from the AlphaFoldDB server (`-i`), running the locally installed DSSP (`-l`), and visualizing the results (`-v`). Selecting of the chain is not required in this situation:

```python run.py -i AF-P00257-F1 -l -v```

To apply the method for locally saved PDB file of experimental or model structure, also use `-i` option:

```python run.py -i /dir1/dir2/4GAW.pdb -c A -l -v```
```python run.py -i /dir1/dir2/AF-P00257-F1.pdb -l -v```

For batch execution of the same command on multiple structures (including mix set - experimental and model structures, ID structures and locally saved PDB files), you can submit a text file with a list of structures and chains, with each entry in two columns (ID and chain) per line (It's recommended to separate values by comma). Specify '-' for AlphaFold structure chain value:

```python run.py -i "/dir1/dir2/structures.txt" -l -v```

Please, see `input_examples` directory for better understanding.

The calculation results are accessible in the `results` directory within a folder named after the corresponding structure ID. The calculated scores in a concise format can be obtained in the file `<Structure_ID>.predictions.txt`.

# User manual

All calculations are performed using the main script `run.py`. To obtain a full list of options, you can execute the `python run.py --help` command.

* `-i` - the structure ID of the input 3D structure for downloading from PDB or AlphaFoldDB servers or the path to the batch file or PDB-file. The batch file is a text file with a two-column format (.txt extension), where the first column contains the structure ID and the second column contains the name of chain. **Importantly, the name of model structure generated by AlphaFold or downloaded from AlphaFoldDB must be started with 'AF-'**.

* `-c` - the name of experimental structure chain.

* `-l` (optional) - run DSSP program locally. It is strongly recommended to install DSSP locally due to potential issues with the connection to the DSSP server.

* `-v` (optional) - generate a visual representation of the 3D structure in Chimera with color-mapped scores. The colors reflecting the scores of structural susceptibility to proteolysis are distributed from blue (low susceptibility) through red (moderate susceptibility) to yellow (high susceptibility). The visual representation file in Chimera format is placed in the `scores` folder.

After completing the calculations, the main script creates a directory named `results` if it does not already exist, and places the final and intermediate output files under the folder with the PDB ID name:

* `<Structure_ID>.predictions.txt` - the calculated scores of structural susceptibility to proteolysis assigned to the P1 site (Schechter-Berger notation) in a file with a concise format.

* `scores` - folder containing detailed output of the method, including the predicted structural susceptibility scores and all associated structural features. If visualization option was enabled, this folder will also contain a Chimera session file.

* `features` - folder containing structural features before and after normalization.

Along with the `results` folder, the root directory also contains system folders `models` and `scripts`, which should not be removed or edited.
 

# Reporting Bugs and Feature Requests
Please use the [GitHub issue tracker](https://github.com/KazanovLab/ProteolysisStructuralPrediction/issues) to report bugs or suggest features.

# Citing
Matveev, E.V.; Safronov, V.V.; Ponomarev, G.V.; Kazanov, M.D. Predicting Structural Susceptibility of Proteins to Proteolytic Processing. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 10761. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241310761
